Update clustering report to include leiden clustering (#895)
AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-analysis: analyses/cell-type-ewings/template_notebooks/clustering-workflow/01-clustering-metrics.Rmd

umap_df <- sce |>
  scuttle::makePerCellDF(use.dimred = "UMAP") |>
  # replace UMAP.1 with UMAP1 and get rid of excess columns
  dplyr::select("cell_id" = barcodes, UMAP1 = UMAP.1, UMAP2 = UMAP.2) |>
  dplyr::left_join(all_cluster_results, by = "cell_id")

split_umap_df <- umap_df |> 
  # add a column that shows the combination of nn/res so we get stats for each unique combo of params 
  dplyr::mutate(cluster_params = glue::glue("{nn}nn-{resolution}res")) |> 
  split(umap_df$cluster_method)
```

Below we visualize the cluster assignments using each parameter on a UMAP. 
This can be helpful to see if any parameters lead to any obvious over or under clustering. 

```{r, fig.height=15, fig.width=10}
# look at clustering results for each library across all params
split_umap_df |> 
  purrr::imap(\(df, method){
    
    ggplot(df, aes(x = UMAP1, y = UMAP2, color = cluster)) +
      geom_point(alpha = 0.5, size = 0.1) +
      facet_grid(rows = vars(nn),
                 cols = vars(resolution),
                 labeller = labeller(nn = ~ glue::glue("{.}-nn"),
                                     resolution = ~ glue::glue("{.}-res"))) +
      theme(
        aspect.ratio = 1,

>         legend.position = "none"

Reviewer: There's a lot of UMAPs here and it's hard to see where one stops and the other starts in the grid. I think adding a border will help!

```suggestion
        legend.position = "none", 
        panel.border = element_rect(color = "black", fill = NA))
```

      ) +
      labs(title = method)
    
  })
```

## Clustering statistics 

Below we calculate a series of statistics: 

- Average silhouette width: This metric evaluates cluster separation. 
Cells with large positive silhouette widths are closer to other cells in the same cluster than to cells in different clusters. 

> Higher values indicate tighter clusters.

Reviewer: might note it goes `[-1,1]`

- Average cluster purity: This metric also evaluates cluster separation and tells us the proportion of neighboring cells that are assigned to the same cluster. 
Purity values range from 0-1 with higher purity values indicating clusters that are well separated. 
- Cluster stability: This evaluates how stable the clustering is to input data. 

> Stability values range from 01- with higher values of cluster stability indicating more reproducible clusters. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stability values range from 0-1 with higher values of cluster stability indicating more reproducible clusters. 
```

---
title: "Clustering exploration for `r params$library_id`"
author: Ally Hawkins
date: "`r Sys.Date()`"
output:
  html_document:
    toc: true
    toc_depth: 3
    code_folding: "hide"
params:
  library_id: "SCPCL000822"
  sce_file: "../../../../data/current/SCPCP000015/SCPCS000490/SCPCL000822_processed.rds"
  cluster_results_file: "SCPCL000822_clusters.tsv"
---

This notebook summarizes clustering metrics for `r params$library_id`.

Louvain clusters are calculated using the following range of parameters: 

- Nearest neighbors: 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, and 40
- Resolution: 0.5, 1, 1.5

Leiden clusters are calcualted using the following range of parameters: 

- Objective function: CPM and modularity 
- Nearest neighbors: 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, and 40

> - Resolution: 0.5, 1, 1.5

Reviewer: Needs the new values used for CPM

- Metrics are then calculated to evaluate clustering results across all parameters: 
  - Silhouette width 
  - Cluster purity 
  - Cluster stability 

## Setup

```{r}
# check that sce file exists
stopifnot(
  "sce file does not exist" = file.exists(params$sce_file)
)
```

```{r packages}
suppressPackageStartupMessages({
  # load required packages
  library(SingleCellExperiment)
  library(ggplot2)
})

# Set default ggplot theme
theme_set(
  theme_classic()
)

# set seed
set.seed(2024)
```

```{r base paths}
# The path to this module
module_base <- rprojroot::find_root(rprojroot::is_renv_project)

# source in clustering functions
clustering_functions <- file.path(module_base, "scripts", "utils", "clustering-functions.R")
source(clustering_functions)
```

```{r}
# read in input sce files
sce <- readr::read_rds(params$sce_file)
```

## Calculate clusters

> 

Reviewer: I might define a chunk here for parameters, e.g. `nn <- seq(5, 40, 5)`. _Or_ we could actually make these actual Rmd params with the values you use here as defaults, which would allow some flexibility if it's needed when running this as a template across samples.

    "{algorithm}-{objective_function}"
  ) |> 
    stringr::str_remove("-NA")
  )
```

## Visualize clusters with UMAP

```{r}
# get umap embeddings and combine into a data frame with cluster assignments
umap_df <- sce |>
  scuttle::makePerCellDF(use.dimred = "UMAP") |>
  # replace UMAP.1 with UMAP1 and get rid of excess columns
  dplyr::select("cell_id" = barcodes, UMAP1 = UMAP.1, UMAP2 = UMAP.2) |>
  dplyr::left_join(all_cluster_results, by = "cell_id")

split_umap_df <- umap_df |> 
  # add a column that shows the combination of nn/res so we get stats for each unique combo of params 
  dplyr::mutate(cluster_params = glue::glue("{nn}nn-{resolution}res")) |> 
  split(umap_df$cluster_method)
```

Below we visualize the cluster assignments using each parameter on a UMAP. 
This can be helpful to see if any parameters lead to any obvious over or under clustering. 

```{r, fig.height=15, fig.width=10}
# look at clustering results for each library across all params
split_umap_df |> 
  purrr::imap(\(df, method){
    
    ggplot(df, aes(x = UMAP1, y = UMAP2, color = cluster)) +
      geom_point(alpha = 0.5, size = 0.1) +
      facet_grid(rows = vars(nn),

>                  cols = vars(resolution),

Reviewer: I think I might actually flip these so the overall look is more horizontal? You may also need to change the r chunk fig width/height.

Author: Since there are more `nn` values used than resolution I think having a wider plot would be hard and make the UMAPs _really_ small. So I'm not super inclined to change this.
